Hello, and welcome back.
In this week, you learn about
optimization algorithms
that will enable you to train your
neural network much faster.
You've heard me say before that applying
machine learning is a highly empirical process,
is a highly iterative process.
In which you just had to train a lot of
models to find one that works really well.
So, it really helps to really
train models quickly.
One thing that makes it more
difficult is that
Deep Learning tends to work best
in the regime of big data.
We are able to train neural networks
on a huge data set
and training on a
large data set is just slow.
So, what you find is that
having fast optimization algorithms,
having good optimization algorithms
can really
speed up the efficiency of
you and your team.
So, let's get started by talking about
mini-batch gradient descent.
You've learned previously that
vectorization allows
you to efficiently compute on all m examples,
that allows you to process your whole
training set without an explicit For loop.
That's why we would take our
training examples and stack them
into these huge matrix capsule Xs.
X1, X2, X3, and then eventually
it goes up to XM training samples.
And similarly for Y this is Y1 and Y2,
Y3 and so on up to YM.
So, the dimension of X was an X by M
and this was 1 by M. Vectorization allows
you to process all M examples relatively
quickly if M is very large
then it can still be slow.
For example what if M was 5 million
or 50 million or even bigger.
With the implementation of gradient descent
on your whole training set,
what you have to do is,
you have to process your entire training set
before you take one little step
of gradient descent.
And then you have to process your
entire training sets of
five million training samples again before
you take another little step of
gradient descent.
So, it turns out that you can get a faster
algorithm if you let gradient descent
start to make some progress even before
you finish processing your entire,
your giant training sets of 5 million examples.
In particular, here's what you can do.
Let's say that you split up your
training set into smaller,
little baby training sets and these
baby training sets are called mini-batches.
And let's say each of your baby training sets
have just 1,000 examples each.
So, you take X1 through X1,000 and
you call that your first little baby training set,
also call the mini-batch.
And then you take home the next 1,000 examples.
X1,001 through X2,000 and the next X1,000
examples and come next one and so on.
I'm going to introduce a new notation.
I'm going to call
this X superscript with curly braces,
1 and I am going to call this,
X superscript with curly braces, 2.
Now, if you have 5 million
training samples total
and each of these little mini batches
has a thousand examples,
that means you have 5,000 of these because
you know, 5,000 times 1,000 equals 5 million.
Altogether you would have 5,000 of
these mini batches.
So it ends with X superscript curly braces
5,000 and then similarly
you do the same thing for Y.
You would also split up your
training data for Y accordingly.
So, call that Y1 then this is
Y1,001 through Y2,000.
This is called, Y2 and so on
until you have Y5,000.
Now, mini batch number T is
going to be comprised of XT,
and YT. And
that is a thousand training samples
with the corresponding input output pairs.
Before moving on, just to make sure
my notation is clear,
we have previously used superscript
round brackets I to index in the training set so X I,
is the I-th training sample.
We use superscript, square brackets
L to index into the different
layers of the neural network.
So, ZL comes from the Z value,
for the L layer of the neural network
and here we are introducing
the curly brackets T to index into
different mini batches.
So, you have XT, YT. And to check your
understanding of these,
what is the dimension of XT and YT?
Well, X is an X by M. So,
if X1 is a thousand training examples
or the X values for a thousand examples,
then this dimension should be Nx by 1,000
and X2 should also be Nx by 1,000 and so on.
So, all of these should have
dimension MX by 1,000 and
these should have dimension 1 by 1,000.
To explain the name of this algorithm,
batch gradient descent, refers to
the gradient descent algorithm we have
been talking about previously.
Where you process your entire training set
all at the same time.
And the name comes from viewing that as
processing your entire batch of
training samples all at the same time.
I know it's not a great name but
that's just what it's called.
Mini-batch gradient descent in contrast,
refers to algorithm which we'll
talk about on the next slide
and which you process is
single mini batch XT,
YT at the same time rather than processing
your entire training set XY the same time.
So, let's see how mini-batch
gradient descent works.
To run mini-batch gradient descent
on your training sets you run for T equals
1 to 5,000 because we had 5,000 mini batches
as high as 1,000 each.
What are you going to do inside the
For loop is basically implement one step of
gradient descent using XT comma YT.
It is as if you had a training set
of size 1,000 examples and it
was as if you were to implement
the algorithm you are
already familiar with, but just on this
little training set
size of M equals 1,000. Rather than
having an explicit For loop over all 1,000 examples,
you would use vectorization to process
all 1,000 examples sort of all at the same time.
Let us write this out. First,
you implement forward prop on the inputs.
So just on XT. And you do that by
implementing Z1 equals W1.
Previously, we would just have
X there, right?
But now you are processing
the entire training set,
you are just processing the
first mini-batch so that it
becomes XT when you're processing mini-batch
T. Then you will have A1 equals G1 of Z1,
a capital Z since this is actually
a vectorized implementation
and so on until you end up with AL,
as I guess GL of ZL, and then
this is your prediction.
And you notice that here you should
use a vectorized implementation.
It's just that this vectorized
implementation processes
1,000 examples at a time rather than
5 million examples.
Next you compute the cost function J
which I'm going to write as
one over 1,000 since here 1,000 is the
size of your little training set.
Sum from I equals one through L
of really the loss of
Y^I YI. And this notation, for clarity,
refers to examples from the mini batch XT YT.
And if you're using regularization,
you can also have this regularization term.
Move it to the denominator times sum of L,
Frobenius norm of the weight matrix squared.
Because this is really the
cost on just one mini-batch,
I'm going to index as cost J with a
superscript T in curly braces.
You notice that everything we are doing
is exactly the same as when
we were previously implementing gradient
descent except that instead of doing it on XY,
you're not doing it on XT YT.
Next, you implement back prop to
compute gradients with respect to JT,
you are still using only XT YT
and then you update the weights W,
really WL, gets updated as WL
minus alpha D WL and similarly for B.
This is one pass through your training set
using mini-batch gradient descent.
The code I have written down here is
also called doing one epoch of training and
epoch is a word that means a single pass
through the training set.
Whereas with batch gradient descent,
a single pass through the training set
allows you to take only one gradient descent step.
With mini-batch gradient descent,
a single pass through the training set,
that is one epoch, allows you to
take 5,000 gradient descent steps.
Now of course you want to take
multiple passes through the training set
which you usually want to,
you might want another for loop for another
while loop out there.
So you keep taking passes through
the training set
until hopefully you converge
or at least approximately converged.
When you have a large training set,
mini-batch gradient descent runs much
faster than batch gradient descent and
that's pretty much what everyone in
Deep Learning
will use when you're training on a
large data set.
In the next video, let's delve deeper
into mini-batch gradient descent so
you can get a better understanding of
what it is doing and why it works so well.